hey there how's it going everybody in
this flats tutorial we'll be learning
how to use templates to return more
complex HTML code than we did in our
last video and also how to pass
variables to our web page so let's go
ahead and get started so I'm starting
with the same script that we left off
with in our last video with these two
routes for our home page and our about
page so we can see in our to route
functions that we're returning these two
HTML headings but most HTML files have a
lot more HTML code than this it contains
a next tire structure with a head tag
body tag and all of that now there's
nothing stopping us from returning all
of that HTML here we could for example
instead of just returning this one
heading tag I could put in 3 quotes for
a multi-line string and I could just
return all of this here and say you know
doctype HTML then open up the HTML tag
and just kind of keep going there but
you can imagine that with a lot of pages
and routes that this would get really
ugly really fast and that we'd create a
ton of repeated HTML like this for every
single route so the best way to do this
would be to instead use templates so to
use templates we first need to create a
templates directory within our folder
within our project I mean and I'll do
that here within sublime text so I'm
just going to right click on my project
and say new folder and I'm going to call
this templates and that's all lowercase
and now within our templates directory
I'm going to create templates for both
of our routes that we currently have so
I'm going to create one for our home
route and one for our about route so I'm
gonna right click on our templates page
here and say new file and I will call
one of these home HTML and I will create
another new file and call this one about
dot HTML and let's do our home route
first so I'll put all of the HTML that
we'd like to have within our home page
within this template here so in sublime
text if I just type HTML and then press
tab then we can see that it fills out
you know a minimal HTML page structure
for us now if your editor doesn't create
a structure like this then you can find
these pages in my github code and I'll
leave a link to that in the description
section below if you'd like to copy and
paste it from there so now that we have
a basic HTML structure let's
the heading tag that we had in our
Python script into this home template so
I'm going to go back to our application
and just grab one of these heading tags
so this is our about page tag here and
I'm gonna paste this into our home
template and just so I'll go to the body
here and paste that in and change about
to home so that we have home page and
now that we have this home template
ready let's actually use this template
when we navigate to our home page so if
we go back to our application then
instead of returning just plain HTML
here instead we can render the template
so first we're going to have to import
the render template function from flask
so up here in our import statement I'm
just going to put a comma and add in the
render template function that we want to
import and now for our return statement
here we can say return render template
and now the template that we want to
render and that template for our home
route is home HTML so now let's save
this and run it from our command line to
make sure that it works so I will pull
back up my terminal here now if you
don't have your terminal open then you
have to have it open and navigate to
your project directory like we did in
the last video and if you remember in
that video we can run our application
just by saying Python flask blog PI we
can see that it's running on our
localhost and debug mode so I'll pull up
our web browser here and reload that
page and we can see that this looks
about the same as it did before but if I
right click and go to view page source
then we can see that instead of just
that h1 tag that now we have an entire
HTML structure here so it is pulling
that structure from at that template ok
so now let's do the same thing for our
about page so I'm gonna pull back up our
application here and I'm gonna go to our
home template first and copy this
structure and paste it into our about
HTML and I'll change this to be the
about page instead of homepage and then
within our application we can't forget
that we actually have to actually render
that template now so I will copy this
from our home ramp and replace that
heading tag and the template that we
want to render there is about dot HTML
so I'll save that
back up our site and go to the ford
slash about page we can see that it
looks similar to what it did in the
first video but if we view our page
source then now we have that entire HTML
structure that it's pulling from that
template so that worked so I'll pull
back up my application here so if you
were just using flash to basically serve
up static HTML pages then that's
basically what we've created here all
you have to do is add in more detailed
HTML and CSS and you'd be good to go but
pretty much every web application these
days doesn't just contain static
information I usually have you know
posts and updates and all kinds of
different information that is being
added to the site on a regular basis so
for example if you remember the
application that I showed in the first
video that I said would be our final
application at the end of this series it
had a lot of different posts by
different authors and those could have
been blog post or pictures or whatever
it is that you're making with your
application so let's say that we had
some posts like this that we wanted to
display in our template so how would we
do that so let's add some dummy data so
that we can see how this is actually
passed into our template so I'm just
going to add some dummy data to the top
of the file here and I'm just going to
call this post and I'm going to set this
equal to a list and this is going to be
a list of dictionaries and each
dictionary is going to represent a
single blog post so for example I will
have an author here and I'll just fill
out some sample information so I'll have
an author of Corey Schaeffer a title and
I'll just set this to a blog post one
and then I will also have some content
and the content we will say is first
content or how about first post content
okay and then lastly let's also do a
date posted so for a date posted I'll
just pass in a string here so we'll say
April 20th 2018 so now let's add in a
nother dictionary here with some
different data to represent another
dummy blog post so we'll change some of
this information up so we'll say that
this author is
Jane Doe for the title will say blog
post to second post content and will say
that this is April 21st 2018 okay so for
now let's pretend that we made a
database call and got back this list of
posts and that's what this post variable
is now we can pass these posts into our
template just by passing an argument
with our data so if I came down here to
our home template then within our render
template function I could simply say
posts is equal to posts so now whatever
variable name we use as the argument
name here that we pass in we will have
access to that variable in our template
and it will be equal to this post data
so now let's switch over to our home
template and see how we would look
through this post data so the templating
engine that flask uses is called Jinja -
and it allows us to write code here
within our templates so to write a for
loop we can open up a code block and a
code block is represented by these curly
braces and then two parentheses here and
within these we can say for post in post
and we also have to tell the templating
engine when the for loop ends and we
just do that with another code block so
that's curly braces and parentheses and
we can just say in for so now within
this for loop we can print out our post
information one post at a time so if we
come in here let's say that we wanted to
print out the post title in an h1 tag so
we can just say h1 and now that we want
to print out an actual variable this
isn't going to be the same as the code
block with the curly braces and
parentheses this is just going to be two
curly braces because now this is just
going to be a variable that we're
printing out so we'll say that we want
to print out the post dot title and we
can use this dot access here within the
template so that dot access does work so
now let's print out a paragraph tag and
let's print out the author and the date
that it was posted as well so I'll say
bye and then we want to put the post
author here so we'll put in our double
curly braces post dot author and within
the same paragraph
I'll print out the date that it was
posted on so I'll say on and then we
want to say post dot and I believe I
called this okay this was date posted so
we want to use this date posted
attribute there and lastly let's print
out the actual content of the post so
just like we were doing before the two
curly braces and post dot content so
real quick let's just look over this
again so we're opening up a code block
here and that code block says for posts
and posts and we got this post value
here this variable we got that by
passing in this argument into our
template and this argument is
equal to this post dummy data here at
the top so this post variable within our
template is going to be equal to this
data so that is where this comes from
here so we're looping over those posts
and for each one we're going to print
out this information of the post so if
we save that now let's see if this
worked so our web server is still
running so I'm going to go back to our
home page and see if we get that data so
we can see that it looped over our dummy
data and displayed the information that
we specified within the HTML and if I
view the page source to actually view
the HTML that it gave to us now this is
a little small here but we can see that
it has both of these sections that were
created here within the for loop okay so
now let me open up our home template
again here so I'll pull up sublime text
so we saw how to do a for loop but we
can also do if else conditionals as well
so let's say that we wanted to be able
to pass a title to our web pages but if
we didn't pass a title then we just want
to use a default of flask blog or
something like that so we could come up
here to our title and I will just type
in the default title that we would want
for our page here and we'll call that
flask blog but now let's add in an
if-else conditional here to where if we
actually passed in a title into this
template then it would print out flask
blog - title or something like that so
to do an if statement we
our code block here with the curly
braces and parentheses and instead of a
for loop will say if title and then I
will copy this here and paste that here
and now we can do an else and now we can
end this I'll paste that in again we can
end this just like we ended the for loop
by saying end if so this title that we
currently have is what we want as our
default title so I'm going to put that
in our else block because we want that
to be the default if no title is
provided and if there is a title
provided then we want it to be flashed
up blog - and then print out that title
that we pass in and mostly what this
looks like in just a second and let's
also add this title section to our about
template as well so I'm going to copy
this entire if-else conditional and
paste that in here to the head section
so now if we go back to our application
code
let's not pass in a title for our home
template because we just want that to be
the default for our application but for
our about page let's pass in a title of
about so I will put in a comma there and
just say title is equal to about so for
our home page template where we didn't
pass in a title then it should come in
here and say if title and see that it
doesn't have one so it'll come down and
just use this flash blog as the title in
our about template it'll see that we do
have a title that we passed in and it
will use this title here instead so now
I'm gonna pull this back up in our
browser and reload these pages so I'll
reload this and we can see here in our
tab that the title of this page is now
called flask blog and if we view the
page source we can see that well that we
can see that too and I know that this
text is a little small here but if we go
to our about page so ford slash about
now we can see that the title of this
page and our tab is flash blog - about
so it is setting those values correctly
using our conditional okay so we're
almost finished up with this tutorial
but there is one thing about our
templates
that isn't a very good design so if you
notice our home page template and our
about template have a lot of similar
repeated code so if I pull those up and
compare those we can see that a lot of
this is similar and there's just this
one section here down in the body that
is different and that's never a good
thing in programming because it means
that if we want to update one of those
sections then we need to update it in
every single location so for example if
we wanted to change our default title
for our website then we would have to
make that change in both the home and
the about template so it's almost always
better to have everything that is
repeated in a single place so that there
is only one place to make changes and
our home template and about template
only contain the information that is
unique to those pages so to accomplish
this we can use something called
template inheritance so let's see what
this looks like so I'm going to create a
new template in our templates directory
and I'm gonna call this layout dot HTML
so within our templates I'm going to
create a new file here and I'm gonna
call this layout dot HTML and hit enter
there to create that file and within
layout that HTML we want to pick out all
of the repeated sections between our
home and our about templates so if we
compare these back and forth like we
said before the only thing that is
different is this body section so I'm
going to copy the code from one of our
templates here I'll use the about
template and paste this into our layout
dot HTML template and then I'll just
delete the part that is unique here to
the about page I'll just delete
everything within the body tag there so
now we only have the HTML that is shared
between both of our routes so now I'm
going to create a block and a block is a
section that the child templates can
override so we'll see this in action in
just a second so I'll create a block
within our body tag and I'll just call
this block content so to do this we can
use the code blocks that we've seen
before and instead we're going to use
this block keyword so I'll say block
content and that's what we're calling it
this block and then do another code
block right after this and then we want
to end that block so I'll say end block
so now within our home and about
templates we'll
inherit this layout template and get all
of this information but then we'll just
override the content section with the
stuff that is unique to each page so
I'll switch over here to the home
template and in this template we want to
use that layout template as the parent
so we can get rid of all the information
that is in that layout template so that
is everything that is outside of the
body so I will remove all of this here
and basically we're just keeping the for
loop that is unique to this home page so
now at the top of this template we can
use that layout template by opening up a
code block here and using the extends
keyword and we want to extend that
layout dot HTML template and now we want
this for loop content here to override
the content block of that layout
template so to do that we can wrap it in
a Content block by saying and I'm going
to indent this here so we can just open
up a Content block here by saying a
block content and then down here at the
bottom we will end that so I will do
another content block and say end block
now the way that we have it here would
work and this is how I see most people
doing it but Jinja to the templating
engine that we're using actually allows
you to put the name of the block after
the end block as well and I like doing
that because if you have multiple blocks
then it can be easy to lose track of
what blocks you're closing so I like to
be explicit
so after M block here I'm gonna say in
block content so content there isn't
needed but like I said I like to put it
just to be explicit that it's actually
closing off this block here okay so now
let's do the same thing with our about
template and I'll just copy everything
that we have here and paste it into our
about template here at the top but
instead of our content being just this
for loop here it's just going to be this
h1 heading so I'll grab this h1 heading
and paste that into our content block
and now we can get rid of everything
that was here before okay so I know that
may have been a lot to take in
so we'll go back over that again once we
make sure that this is all still working
so after we save this then we should be
able to reload it in our browser and
still have the same pages that we had
before so let's check this out really
fast so let's make sure that our web
server is still running now we'll pull
back up Chrome here and if we go to our
about page we can see that that works
and if we go to our home page we can see
that that still works as well and if we
actually check the source code of these
pages then we can see that it still has
the entire HTML structure there as well
so all of that is still working so these
pages look the same as they did before
but now we're using that template
inheritance so that we're not repeating
code so let me show you why this is so
powerful so let's say that we wanted to
now update our entire website to use
bootstrap now if you don't know what
bootstrap is basically and exit it's an
extremely popular library that makes it
easy to add some nice styles to your
website and i'll be using bootstrap in
this series since it will allow us to
add nice Styles easily without taking
away any of the focus from flask so to
add bootstrap to our website I'm going
to open up the starter template from the
bootstrap documentation to see how they
say to do this and already have this
open up here so this is a basic starter
template that they give here and we can
see that we need to add some tags and a
link to some CSS here in the head of the
website and also down here at the bottom
right before the closing body tag we
need to add some JavaScript files as
well
now the CSS and JavaScript it's using
are all served from a CDN which is a
content delivery network so there's
nothing we actually need to download so
we should just be able to drop this in
to our site and we'll be good to go now
there is actually a flask extension for
bootstrap called flask bootstrap and I
won't be using that in this video
because I feel like it's something
additional to learn and if you're
already familiar with bootstrap classes
then there's really no reason that you
can't just use it directly and also I
feel like it just gives you a bit more
control with the design just to do it
manually but if anyone is interested
then I could show how to use the flask
bootstrap extension and a later video
now if we weren't using template
inheritance
then we'd have to make these changes to
every template in our application and
not only would that be easy to screw up
but it would be almost impossible to
maintain once the number of pages on our
website you know grew to a certain level
but now we just need to make these
changes to that single layout template
that our other templates inherit from so
to do this I'll first copy these meta
tags and the CSS that needs to be added
to the head of our page so I will grab
these meta tags here and the bootstrap
CSS and copy that and that needs to be
added to the head of our page so I'll
open back up our layout template which
will affect our other templates since
they inherit from them and within the
head I'll actually put these above the
title here so I will just paste those in
and save that and now let's also copy
the JavaScript that we need as well so
I'm going to go back here and grab all
of this JavaScript and copy that and we
will paste that above the closing body
tag of our layout so down here and our
body I will paste in that JavaScript and
save that and now let's use a bootstrap
specific class to see if this works
so I'm going to wrap our content in a
div with the class of container which
will give the content some good padding
and spacing so I will do a div here and
this div I will give a class equal to
container which is a bootstrap class and
now I will move our content inside of
that container div and then I will clear
up these here and simply adding in that
CSS and JavaScript should be enough for
our application to now be using
bootstrap so if I go and reload our page
and the browser now so I'm going to
refresh this and I'm gonna do a hard
refresh with command shift R which will
also clear the cache so we can see that
when I reloaded that that the text
changed and also the margins are also
different and if I go to the about page
so I'll do ford slash about and then we
can see that that text and margins are
different on that page as well and it
works on both of those pages because
both
templates are inheriting that single
layout template okay so I know that's a
lot to take in so let's do a quick recap
before moving on to the next topic so we
created a new template called layout dot
HTML which we are seeing here and this
is our parent template that the others
will inherit from so this has the main
structure of our HTML that is going to
be included on every page now you can
have multiple blocks but right now we
only have this single block down here
called block content and we didn't have
to call that block content we could have
called it pretty much anything that we
wanted but this content block is what
the other templates are going to
override and when they override the
content block with data it will place
that data at this location in the HTML
so if we go to our home template then we
can see we are extending the layout
template and we are specifying that we
want to put some information into our
content block and that information is
the dummy post data that we've seen
before so when it's all said and done if
I go to the home page in the browser and
look at the page source here then we can
see that we have all of this information
from the layout template and then our
two dummy
blog posts are here in the container div
which is where our content block was
located okay so now that we have a base
layout template in place let's add a
navigation bar and some global styles to
our website so that it looks a little
nicer and similar to our final product
that we saw before now this is a good
bit of HTML so I'm going to grab this
from some code snippets so you don't
have to watch me type all of this out
and the link to these code snippets will
be in the description section below so
you can grab these snippets as well now
really you could fall along with these
videos just fine without selling your
application but having these in place
will just give you a better idea for how
this might look in a real finished
application so let me open up my
snippets folder here and I have this on
my desktop so I'm gonna say from within
sublime I'm going to open this and open
this snippets folder on my desktop now
the first snippet that I'm going to grab
is in this file called navigation dot
HTML
so you can see I have a lot of HTML here
with a lot of different bootstrap styles
so I'm going to copy that and go back to
our layout dot HTML file and I'm going
to paste all of that information right
below the opening body tag so I'll paste
that in and get these intentions correct
there so what we added here is a
navigation bar with some bootstrap
classes that will make this look nice
and also is responsive so for example if
you're on a smaller screen then it will
resize everything appropriately okay and
I'm also going to put in a new main
section here that contains our content
block and this snippet is in my main
HTML folder so I'm going to bring this
up close down that snippet and open up
this main HTML snippet here and like I
said I'll have links to these in the
description sections below if you want
to grab those as well so I'm going to
copy this and we can see that we have
our content block in here so I've got
all of that copied I'm going to minimize
this and in our layouts I'm going to
replace our current container div and
our current block content there and I'm
going to replace that with what I just
copied so we have this new container and
I will indent those correctly and also I
will remove the space here okay and I
also have a few custom styles that
aren't bootstrap specific and those are
going to be in a file called main CSS
now since this will be a CSS file in our
actual project we'll need to put it
somewhere and in flask static files like
CSS and JavaScript need to be located in
a static directory so let's create a
directory in our project and call this
static so I'll right click on my project
here and do new folder and I will create
this static folder which is all
lowercase and then within our static
folder I'm going to create our main dot
CSS file so I'm going to say new file
and this is going to be main dot CSS so
I'll create that and within this main
CSS I'm going to grab another snippet of
code and in my snippets folder I called
this main CSS so I will pull this up
and do a control a to grab all of this
it's not very long it's only 80 lines of
custom styles so I will copy that and
put that into our main CSS within our
actual project okay and now that we have
this main CSS file that we want to use
now we have to include this in our
layout template and we're going to need
to use a new flask function here called
URL 4 and URL 4 is a function that will
find the exact location of routes for us
so that we don't need to worry about it
in the background so let's go back to
our main application our flash blog PI
and let's import that URL for function
so up here in the imports from flask
I will also import URL 4 and now back in
our layout we can use this by coming up
here to the head section of our website
and we're going to want to add this
style below the bootstrap styles so I'm
going to grab the opening part of the
bootstrap style there and I will now say
that I want a new style sheet and this
is going to be a type equal to text
forged slash CSS and we can use the href
to say where the CSS file is located now
this is where we use that URL for
function so I'm going to open up some
double curly braces here so that we can
write some code and I will say URL for
and we want this to be a URL for our
static directory and within our static
directory we can pass in a another
argument here of file name and we will
set this file name equal to and I'll
actually use single quotes here since we
have double quotes on the outside and
I'll just say equal to main dot CSS so
now the style sheet at the top of our
layout here is linking to this main dot
CSS file within our static folder and
our URL for function will take care of
finding that exact location for us now
it's a good idea to use URL for for just
about as many links as you can in your
site so it would also be good for us to
use this in our navigation as well but
our navigation bar
currently has two routes that we haven't
created yet and we'll be creating those
in the next video
so we'll actually change those
navigation links once those routes exist
and at this point we should be pretty
close to being done so if we reload our
page in the browser let's see if all of
these changes have taken effect and I
might need to check and see if our web
server is still running and it is so I
can close this down and now reload our
page then we can see that with those
added snippets that this looks a lot
nicer now there are only a few more
touches that I'd like to add so it would
be nice to visually split up these blog
posts a bit and the main CSS file that
we already added has some styles for
that we just need to put in the correct
HTML so within my snippets folder I have
a file called article dot HTML so let me
grab that snippet as well so I'm going
to come over here and open up article
HTML and I'm going to copy this and we
can see here that this is just some
updated code for how our post is
displayed this is all of our post
information that we had before with some
additional HTML and styles so I'm going
to put this within our loop for our blog
post which is currently on our homepage
so if I go back and open up our home
template then this is the loop for our
blog post here and instead of these h1
and paragraphs that we had before I'm
just going to get rid of those and paste
in our new code and I'll get this
indentation correct here and save that
ok so now if we save that and reload it
in our browser then let's see what that
looks like ok so now we can see that
those blog posts are nice and split up a
little bit better than they were before
okay so this is all starting to come
together and look a lot nicer so I think
that is going to do it for this video I
hope that now you have a good
understanding of templates and how we
can pass data into them and also the
benefits of creating parent templates so
that we can update every page on our
site in a single location in the next
video we'll be learning how to create
and validate forms so that we can get
started with creating some accounts and
posting some real data to our website
instead of just using this dummy data so
if anyone has any questions about what
we covered in this video then feel free
to ask in the comment section below and
I'll do
my best to answer those and if you
enjoyed these tutorials and would like
to support them then there are several
ways you can do that the easiest ways to
simply like the video and give it a
thumbs up and also it's a huge help to
share these videos with anyone who you
think would find them useful and if you
have the means you can contribute
through patreon and there's a link to
that page in the description section
below
be sure to subscribe for future videos
and thank you all for watching
you